Define stateless CONNECTION_CLOSE (#3292)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

whether the client has Handshake keys.  Under these circumstances, a server
SHOULD send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in both Handshake and Initial packets
to ensure that at least one of them is processable by the client.  These

> packets can be coalesced into a single UDP datagram; see {{packet-coalesce}}.

Reviewer: Re-reading this paragraph I realize it needs an update for the new timing of discarding Handshake on the server side, because it means a client may want to send a CONNECTION_CLOSE in both Handshake and 1-RTT.

Author: #3293

Reviewer: thx

A CONNECTION_CLOSE frame that is sent in an Initial packet in response to
unauthenticated information - the content of Initial or Handshake packets
primarily - might result in denial of service for a legitimate connection.  QUIC
does not include defensive measures for on-path attacks during the handshake
(see {{handshake-dos}}). However, at the cost of reducing feedback about errors
for legitimate peers, some forms of denial of service can be made more difficult

> for an attacker if endpoints discard illegal packets rather than terminating a

Reviewer: Is it worth re-stating that the client address can't change during the handshake, so Initial and Handshake packets from a different address can be immediately discarded?

Author: Good idea, but I'll add that elsewhere.

of {{QUIC-TLS}}.  These packets can be coalesced into a single UDP datagram; see
{{packet-coalesce}}.

> A CONNECTION_CLOSE frame might be sent in an Initial packet or in response to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An endpoint might send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in an Initial packet or in response to
```

> unauthenticated information received in Initial or Handshake packets.  An

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unauthenticated information received in Initial or Handshake packets.
```

> immediate close in response might result in a denial of service for a legitimate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such an immediate close might expose legitimate connections to a denial of service.
```

> connection.  QUIC does not include defensive measures for on-path attacks during

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
QUIC does not include defensive measures for on-path attacks during
```

the handshake; see {{handshake-dos}}.  However, at the cost of reducing feedback
about errors for legitimate peers, some forms of denial of service can be made
more difficult for an attacker if endpoints discard illegal packets rather than
terminating a connection with CONNECTION_CLOSE.  For this reason, endpoints MAY
discard packets rather than immediately close if errors are detected in packets
that lack authentication.

An endpoint that has not established state, such as a server that detects an
error in an Initial packet, does not enter the closing state.  An endpoint that

> has no state for the connection sends a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame without entering

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has no state for the connection does not enter a closing or draining period
```

> a closing or draining period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.
```

believes that the Path Maximum Transmission Unit (PMTU) supports the size that
it chooses.

A server that has no existing state for a connection MUST discard an Initial
packet that is carried in a UDP datagram that is smaller than 1200 bytes.  Other
packets in the datagram SHOULD also be discarded.  A server MAY send a

> CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with error code PROTOCOL_VIOLATION in addition to

Reviewer: I didn't realize we had text in here that allowed this.  I think we're better off with always dropping <1200 byte packets, personally, and keeping the MUST you added above.

discarding a packet if that does not affect a connection for which the server

> has established state; see {{immediate-close}}.

Reviewer 3: I am confused by the last sentence. Is it saying that when a server receives a small Initial packet for a connection for which it already has state, the server MAY send a PROTOCOL_VIOLATION, but it must retain the state for that connection? Assuming that is the case, I wonder if there is a value in having such a requirement. I am not sure if there is a case such a behavior helps us mitigate attacks.

Reviewer 4: My understanding was essentially that it's OK for the server to send PROTOCOL_VIOLATION in response to an Initial for which there isn't connection state already (i.e. the first Initial packet for a connection); because that means it couldn't affect a pre-existing connection.

Reviewer 3: Yeah if we interpret the last sentence that way, I think it would contradict with the "MUST discard" in the first sentence?

Reviewer 2: I'm confused here too. What does it mean to not affect the connection if the server just sent out a CONNECTION_CLOSE for it?

Reviewer 2: I am in agreement with @ianswett : perhaps it's best to recommend dropping the connection and not send anything in response. This is a simple enough error for a client to avoid.

Author: The problem I'm trying to finesse around here is one where the server gets a partial ClientHello in an Initial.  That is processed and held.  The next packet is a small Initial.  The server should discard that *without* generating a CONNECTION_CLOSE or it will disrupt the in-progress connection establishment.

Reviewer: My understanding is that the server should discard that packet because it's not 1200 bytes and it has no state for the connection?

Reviewer 3: @martinthomson Thank you for the clarification.

I think there are three possible behaviors in such a situation:
* immediate-close the connection with PROTOCOL_VIOLATION
* discard the small Initial
* discard the small Initial, send PROTOCOL_VIOLATION, without affecting the connection state

I think that either of the first two makes sense.

However, the third one (which IIUC is what the text suggests) does not. This is because sending PROTOCOL_VIOLATION will instruct the client to discard *its* connection state, regardless of the sender of the small Initial packet being the client or an attacker. There is no point in the server retaining the connection state after sending PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

Therefore, I think that the advice should be: SHOULD discard, MAY immediate-close.

Author: @kazuho, I agree with you about the first two.  The rule I'm proposing is MUST discard, but MAY immediate-close in addition IF that won't affect state the server holds.  Yes, that might affect state the client holds (but the server does not), but that's a risk the server takes.  It's a trade-off about the level of feedback the server wants to provide vs. the risk of DoS that the server has to make.

Are we agreeing violently, but talking about how to phrase the recommendation to not immediate-close?

Reviewer 3: @martinthomson 
> The rule I'm proposing is MUST discard, but MAY immediate-close in addition IF that won't affect state the server holds.

I think we might have confusion in what "immediate-close" means? My understanding is that "immediate-close" is an action that affects state. It is defined as entering the closing state, then draining state. If the intention is to suggest that a server might send PROTOCOL_VIOLATION without affecting the connection state, then it is confusing to use the term "immediate-close."

That said, what I stated in [my comment right above](https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3292#discussion_r355760171) is that I think a state-*ful* "immediate-close" is fine, but sending PROTOCOL_VIOLATION without affecting connection state does not make sense.

Reviewer 2: We've now unfortunately lost this comment in the diffs :-/ But that was my confusion too -- sending CONNECTION_CLOSE changes state. I don't understand what it means to send PROTOCOL_VIOLATION without affecting state.

Author: Let's see if I can keep this thread alive.  This is sending a packet with a CONNECTION_CLOSE, not an immediate close (I was under the impression that the shorthand was OK here, but it was clearly a mistake).  The goal is to use CONNECTION_CLOSE as a signal only, with the intent of triggering the corresponding logic at the client.  But the server is discarding this packet and so it won't have any connection state.  This won't result in creation or destruction of server state.

Reviewer 3: > The goal is to use CONNECTION_CLOSE as a signal only, with the intent of triggering the corresponding logic at the client.

I think it is not a bad idea to have a MAY for that.

> But the server is discarding this packet and so it won't have any connection state. This won't result in creation or destruction of server state.

I do not think that the sentences reflect what you think. Quoted below are the last two sentences of this paragraph. It is my understanding that the intention of the last sentence is to clarify the rationale behind the previous sentence, but as you can see from the emphasized text, they are discussing about different conditions.

> _A server MAY send a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with error code PROTOCOL_VIOLATION in addition to discarding a packet if that does not affect **a connection for which the server has previously established state**.  Sending CONNECTION_CLOSE will not affect server state in the same way as an immediate close ({{immediate-close}}) **as the server has no state**, but it will cause any client to terminate a connection attempt._

I think what we actually want to state is something like:  _A server that has no existing state for a connection MUST discard an Initial packet that is carried in a UDP datagram that is smaller than 1200 bytes.  Other packets in that datagram SHOULD also be discarded. In addition to discarding the packet, a server MAY respond with a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with error code PROTOCOL_VIOLATION, without creating state. When a server receives such an Initial packet for which it already has connection state, it MUST either drop that packet or close the connection with error code PROTOCOL_VIOLATION ({{immediate-close}})._

believes that the Path Maximum Transmission Unit (PMTU) supports the size that
it chooses.

A server MUST discard an Initial packet that is carried in a UDP datagram that
is smaller than 1200 bytes.  A server MAY also immediately close the connection
by sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an error code of PROTOCOL_VIOLATION;

> see {{immediate-close}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
see {{immediate-close-hs}}.
```

attack from off the network path.  All QUIC packets contain proof that the
recipient saw a preceding packet from its peer.

Addresses cannot change during the handshake, so endpoints can discard packets
that are received on a different network path.

> The source and destination connection IDs are the primary means of protection

Reviewer 3: s/source and destination connection IDs/Source and Destination Connection IDs/

It is my understanding is that we use CamelCase for these terms.

Reviewer 5: We might have gotten sloppy on the distinction, but I believe in most places we capitalize the field names, but lower-case the concepts.

Author: Yup.  I don't think that we have the concept of a "destination connection ID" separate from the field though, so I am now referring to the fields directly.

against off-path attack during the handshake.  These are required to match those
set by a peer.  Except for an Initial and stateless reset packets, an endpoint

> only accepts packets that include a destination connection that matches a

Reviewer 3: s/a destination connection/a Destination Connection ID/
